Feat(Mesh): DPP authentication (#5013)
Kong/developer.konghq.com: app/mesh/data-plane-proxy-authentication.md

  - text: 'Secure access across services'
    url: '/mesh/secure-access/'
  - text: Configure zone proxy authentication
    url: /mesh/zone-proxy-auth/
---

To obtain a configuration from the control plane, a data plane proxy must authenticate itself. There are several authentication methods available.

## Service Account Token

On Kubernetes, a data plane proxy proves its identity with the [Service Account Token](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/service-accounts-admin/#bound-service-account-token-volume) that is mounted in every Pod.

If you don't explicitly specify `serviceAccountToken` in a Deployment, the Pod runs with the `default` Service Account Token in the namespace.
This means that the authentication scope is bound to a namespace, so any Pod in the namespace can authenticate as any other Pod in that namespace.

To enforce strict security per Deployment, every Deployment should use a unique Service Account Token.
Users should also not be able to modify `serviceAccountToken` in a `Deployment`. You can enforce this with a policy engine such as [OPA Gatekeeper](https://open-policy-agent.github.io/gatekeeper/website/docs/).

> A Service Account Token is not bound to a mesh. For information on restricting which Pods can join a mesh, see [data plane proxy membership](/mesh/configure-data-plane-proxy-membership/).

Reviewer: Emphasis on the agent that bounds or doesn't bound:

```suggestion
Kubernetes itself doesn't bound the Service Account Token to a mesh. For information on restricting which Pods can join a mesh, see [data plane proxy membership](/mesh/configure-data-plane-proxy-membership/).
```

* The expiration date of the token (required; defaults to 10 years if not specified)
* The mesh to which the data plane belongs (required)
* The name of the data plane proxy (optional)
* A list of allowed tags (optional)
* {% new_in 2.13 %} The workload label value (optional)

The data plane proxy token is signed by a signing key that is autogenerated when the mesh is created.
Tokens are never stored in the control plane, only the signing keys used to verify tokens are stored.
The signing key uses the `RS256` signing algorithm (RSA with SHA-256).

You can check for the signing key using the following command:

```sh
kumactl get secrets
```

It returns something like this:

```
MESH      NAME                                    AGE
default   dataplane-token-signing-key-default-1   49s
```

### Usage

You can generate a data plane proxy token using either the API or kumactl:

{% navtabs "generate-token" %}
{% navtab "API" %}

```bash
curl -XPOST \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  --data '{"name": "dp-echo-1", "mesh": "default", "tags": {"kuma.io/service": ["backend", "backend-admin"]}, "validFor": "720h"}' \
  http://localhost:5681/tokens/dataplane
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Your generated token will be printed in your terminal output.
```

{% endnavtab %}
{% navtab "kumactl" %}

```bash
kumactl generate dataplane-token \
  --name dp-echo-1 \
  --mesh default \
  --tag kuma.io/service=backend,backend-admin \
  --valid-for 720h > /tmp/kuma-dp-echo1-token
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Your generated token will be stored in `/tmp/kuma-dp-echo1-token`. To check its value, you can run `cat /tmp/kuma-dp-echo1-token`.
```

{% endnavtab %}
{% endnavtabs %}

#### Workload label in tokens {% new_in 2.13 %}

You can optionally bind a token to a specific workload by including the `workload` parameter. This provides additional authentication granularity beyond service tags.

{% navtabs "generate-token-workload" %}
{% navtab "API" %}

```bash
curl -XPOST \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  --data '{"name": "dp-backend-1", "mesh": "default", "workload": "backend", "validFor": "720h"}' \
  http://localhost:5681/tokens/dataplane
```

{% endnavtab %}
{% navtab "kumactl" %}

```bash
kumactl generate dataplane-token \
  --name dp-backend-1 \
  --mesh default \
  --workload backend \
  --valid-for 720h > /tmp/kuma-dp-backend-1-token
```

{% endnavtab %}
{% endnavtabs %}

When a token includes a workload value, the data plane proxy must have a matching `kuma.io/workload` label. This label can be set either:

> * In the token itself (as shown above)

Reviewer: Avoid geometrical syntax:

```suggestion
* In the token itself (as shown in previous instructions)
```

The control plane verifies the connecting data plane proxy resource against the token. The scope of a token depends on what you include at generation time:

* Only `mesh`: The token can be reused for all data planes in that mesh.
* `mesh` + `tag` (for example, `kuma.io/service`): The token can be used across all instances of a given service. You must include all services that the data plane proxy is responsible for. For example, if a Dataplane has two inbounds, one tagged `kuma.io/service: backend` and one tagged `kuma.io/service: backend-admin`, you must specify both values (`--tag kuma.io/service=backend,backend-admin`).
* `mesh` + `name` + `tag` (for example, `kuma.io/service`): The token is scoped to a single instance of a given service.
* {% new_in 2.13 %} `mesh` + `workload`: The token is bound to data plane proxies with a specific `kuma.io/workload` label value, providing finer-grained authentication than service tags.

### Token revocation

{% include /mesh/token-revocation.md type="dataplane" %}

### Signing key rotation

{% include /mesh/signing-key-rotation.md type="dataplane" %}

### Token rotation

> If you need to generate a new token for a data plane proxy, or if you are using Service Account Token projection on Kubernetes, you can configure dynamic token reloading. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can configure dynamic token reloading if:
* You need to generate a new token for a data plane proxy.
* You are using Service Account Token projection on Kubernetes. 
```
